International Journal of Business and Social Science                               Vol. 2 No. 24 [Special Issue – December 2011]  
1  
Integrating REA and XBRL GL to Facilitate Modern Business Reporting  
 
Denise Guithues Amrhein, Ph.D., CPA  
Department of Accounting  
John Cook School of Business  
Saint Louis University  
USA  
 
Abstract  
 
Debreceny and Gray (2003) examined the ontological underpinnings of the eXtensible Business Reporting 
Language (XBRL) while Geerts and McCarthy (2004) and Buder and Koschtial (2009) examined the ontological 
underpinnings of the Resource -Event -Agent (REA) model. What has been lacking is an assessment of the 
complementary nature of these two ontologies. We propose that synergistic benefits can be achieved by 
combining eXtensible Business Reporting Language Global Ledger (XBRL GL) and the timeless RE A-Enterprise 
Ontology (REA -EO) model. The timeless REA -EO semantic model is the means to articulate the organization’s 
information needs while XBRL GL is the information standard for instantiating an organization’s information 
needs with tagging that provi des agreed -upon meta descriptions of data elements/attributes, business rules, and 
references. This paper examines how the combination of XBRL GL and REA can facilitate increased adaptability 
and re -usability of business information which is needed to serv e today’s dynamic business environment.  
 
Keywords: Ontologies, REA, REA -EO, XBRL GL   
 
1. Introduction  
 
In today‘s complex interconnected global business environment, ―spatial, temporal, geographical, jurisdictional, 
risk and organizational dimensions of transactions need to be captured and processed in a more integrative fashion 
than traditional double -entry bookkeeping allows‖ (Cheh 2005, 25). McCarthy (1982) proposed the Resource -
Event -Agent (REA) model as a means to overcome the deficiencies of double -entry bookkeeping. Once the 
information concerning these business transactions has been captured and proc essed, the next step is to 
disseminate that information to decision makers and other interested parties for their use. ―To support the sharing 
and reuse of formally represented knowledge among AI systems, it is useful to define the common vocabulary in 
which shared knowledge is represented‖ (Gruber 1993, 199). The eXtensible Business Reporting Language 
Global Ledger (XBRL GL) provides such a vocabulary. XBRL GL is a specialized taxonomy for the tagging of 
financial and non -financial information at the granu lar level so that it may be shared across disparate systems.  
 
The XBRL GL taxonomy represents an ontology in that it represents agreed upon definitions and relationships 
between the XBRL GL taxonomy elements. While the generalized XBRL GL taxonomy is quit e comprehensive it 
is likely that company and industry specific extensions 1 will be required to fully satisfy reporting needs. In fact, 
the need for additions such as more powerful templates (e.g., within the measurable structure or audit/workflow) 
and que ries to XBRL GL has been recognized (XBRL Intl. 2007). Because taxonomies will be used for a 
significant period of time, it is important to apply a consistent thought process to the development of extensions 
so that they follow a consistent and logical pat tern and do not become absent of fundamental ontological and 
design principles. The goal of any extensions to the XBRL GL taxonomy should be consistent with the GL 
philosophy whereby elements and structures are holistic and reusable. Further, extensions sh ould make use of 
established standards (i.e., the International Standards Organization (ISO)) and formal modeling approaches when 
they exist. We build on the suggestion of Debreceny and Gray (2003, 8) who suggest REA as an appropriate 
modeling grammar for the XBRL ontology.  
 
The challenging transition from a traditional double -entry system to a multifaceted contemporary system can be 
facilitated by combining the timeless REA -EO and the XBRL -GL ontologies. As with ontologies in other areas 
that are being de signed ―for the purpose of enabling knowledge sharing and reuse‖ ( Gruber 1992 ), both REA and 
XBRL GL are intended to facilitate the sharing of information.  
                                                             
1 We use the term extensions to include both the addition of new elements and modifications to enumerations contained in 
the XBRL GL taxonomy modules.  The Special Issue on Business, Humanities and Social Science                                  © Centre for Promoting Ideas, USA  
2  
The REA -EO model can provide valuable guidance in developing a strong common vocabulary based on sound 
ontological principles and extensions consistent with that vocabulary. We suggest the timeless REA -EO as an 
appropriate choice for the modeling and devel opment of XBRL GL taxonomy extensions. In addition to providing 
a comprehensive conceptual model to follow for enterprise system design, it is consistent with the existing XBRL 
GL taxonomy. An instance document mapped to a REA -EO extended XBRL GL taxonomy provides synergistic 
benefits with XBRL GL contributing more transparent and timely business reporting across information systems 
and the REA -EO providing more comprehensive reporting. Moving from a paper centric model of tagging 
financial statement data a fter the fact to a data centric view where data is tagged at the source would increase the 
reusability of data for both internal and external use. This reusability is necessary to efficiently meet the 
information requirements of modern organizations.  
 
In the next section we provide a discussion of ontologies followed by a discussion of the fundamental ontological 
underpinnings of XBRL in general, XBRL GL specifically, and the REA -EO model. In the third section we 
discuss how to model an organization‘s busi ness processes using the REA -EO model and then tag those elements 
with existing XBRL GL elements, through reference to existing external standards, modifications to the existing 
XBRL GL enumerated values, and extensions to the XBRL GL taxonomy when necessa ry. The final section 
includes conclusions and recommendations for future research.  
 
II. BACKGROUND  
 
Ontologies    
The analysis of ontologies has received little attention within the accounting research domain. The limited 
attention that ontologies have re ceived has been within the accounting information systems field. Although there 
is some disagreement as to what an ontology is within the artificial intelligence (AI) realm, Gruber (1992) 
provides a succinct definition --―An ontology is a specification of a  conceptualization.‖ Gruber (1995, 908) 
expanded the definition to a ―formal, explicit specification of a shared conceptualization.‖  The study of 
ontologies in accounting is important  because using an explicit specification facilitates the reuse and shar ing of 
knowledge across multiple platforms. This ability to share knowledge across platforms is critical to success in 
today's global dynamic operating environment where multinational corporations and international trading partners 
must consolidate and/or share information maintained on disparate systems.       
Although there is some disagreement as to what constitutes a good ontology those attributes identified by Gruber 
(1995, 910) have appeal. Clarity, the first of Gruber‘s criteria, implies clear defini tions that are context 
independent. Coherence, the second criteria, requires consistency in the application of the definitions within the 
domain. Extensibility, the third criteria, implies the ability to meet the needs of changing foundations and best 
practices. Fourth, there should be minimal encoding biases so that coding is neither constrained nor are coders 
forced to exhibit biases in the coding of knowledge. Lastly, there should be minimal ontological commitment so 
that it makes few pre -conceived requi rements about the modeled environment.  
 
Extensible Business Reporting Language (XBRL)  
 
―XBRL  is a language for the electronic communication of business and financial data which is revolutionising 
business reporting around the world. It provides major benefits in the preparation, analysis and communication of 
business information. It offers cost s avings, greater efficiency and improved accuracy and reliability to all those 
involved in supplying or using financial data‖ (XBRL Intl. 2009a). Extensible Business Reporting Language 
(XBRL) is a derivative of Extensible Markup Language (XML) that uses dat a tags to contain meta -data. 
Debreceny and Gray (2003) reverse engineered the draft US GAAP and International Accounting Standards 
(IFRS) taxonomies to examine the underlying ontological structure and suggested REA as an appropriate 
modeling grammar for th e XBRL ontology.  .  Most applications of XBRL have been in government and external 
financial reporting applications (e.g., Dutch Water Boards, FFEIC Call Reports, KOSDAQ, and SEC). This has 
occurred because governments have the ability to require use rath er than waiting for adoption to be driven by 
market demand. The government agencies can achieve significant cost reductions in data re -entry by requiring the 
organization furnishing the information to provide the data in a non -proprietary tagged format tha t allows sharing 
among multiple application platforms.  Currently, companies typically follow a paper -centric process for capturing 
and reporting financial information tagging the data after the fact using either internal software or external service 
provid ers to map the data to the existing GAAP taxonomy extensions.  
 International Journal of Business and Social Science                               Vol. 2 No. 24 [Special Issue – December 2011]  
3  
If companies continue their current process they may see no immediate measurable internal benefits for their 
efforts other than ensuring statutory compliance and perhaps, as it has been theor ized, a benefit from increased 
analyst coverage and reduced regulatory reporting costs. 2 To achieve the maximum benefits offered by XBRL, 
movement toward a data centric view of information is critical. By tagging data earlier in the process, at the point 
of data capture, the data can be re -purposed for a greater number of possibilities. To move to this data centric 
model we move from XBRL for Financial Reporting (XBRL FR) to XBRL Global Ledger (XBRL GL).  
 
Extensible Business Reporting Language Global Ledger  (XBRL GL)  
 
Extensible Business Reporting Global Ledger (XBRL GL) provides the means for organizations to move away 
from an after -the-fact paper -centric model to a data -centric model of tagging information at the point of data 
capture. However, there appears to be a w ide-spread misperception that XBRL GL is a general ledger system 
which reports debits, credits, and accounts. This narrow definition ignores the potential for XBRL GL to capture 
more comprehensive information. ―XBRL GL, the standardized Global Ledger, is a  standard format to represent 
financial and non -financial data at the detail level, move the data between different systems and applications, and 
provide context for drilling down from summary reporting (XBRL FR) to the detail data that flows to it,‖ 
(Garb ellotto 2006, 59).   
 
XBRL GL is not intended to take the place of an ERP system, nor is it intended to be a transaction exchange 
standard in the vein of EDI. It allows users to tag the items in the data warehouse so that those items can be used, 
reused, a nd combined with data from other sources. Modules allow ― the representation of anything that is found 
in a chart of accounts, journal entries or historical transactions, financial and non -financial. It does not require a 
standardised chart of accounts to g ather information, but it can be used to tie legacy charts of accounts and 
accounting detail to a standardised chart of accounts to improve communications within a business ‖ (XBRL Intl. 
2009b). 3  Moreover, XBRL GL does not require assigning the information  to an account. In fact, the information 
can be associated with end -user financial reporting without being assigned to an intermediary account. Further 
flexibility exists in that XBRL GL is not tied to any particular set of accounting standards or methods.  As such, 
the information can be simultaneously (or alternatively) reported in accordance with multiple accounting 
standards (e.g. IFRS and US GAAP) or utilizing different accounting methods (e.g. cash and accrual basis). These 
characteristics are consiste nt with those identified by Ushold and Gruninger (1996) as underlying qualities of 
ontologies.  
 
The GL taxonomy contains elements to capture information such as who entered the purchase order, when the 
purchase order was entered, the terms, whether the purchase order is chargeable or reimbursable, and the date 
received. Thus, non -financial information  can be captured in addition to the financial facts. XBRL GL is a global 
ledger  system that uses approximately 400 elements to represent thousands of elements that depending on the 
context can represent a broad range of qualitative and quantitative informa tion. The majority of the elements are 
for operational and reporting details. In fact, there is only one field for the debit or credit and a dozen more for 
account structure details. The data tags are designed with reuse in mind. For example, the element 
―identifierContactFirstName‖ can be re -used with meaning conveyed by the ―identifierType‖ whereby the first 
name might be that of a supplier contact, a customer or an employee thereby eliminating redundancy of having 
separate first name elements for supplie r, customer and employee.  
 
Further, information about the company reporting the transactions would not typically be captured by the 
reporting system. By embedding the reporting company‘s name into the instance document, it continues to be 
associated with the transactions when the information is consolidated or shared among information supply chain 
partners. The measurable structure can carry details about services, machine cycles, benchmarking, key 
performance indicators, fixed assets and other details sel dom associated with accounting per se. XBRL GL 
enhances communication between disparate systems and applications by enabling knowledge sharing and reuse 
which is the purpose of ontologies as stated by Gruber ( 1992 ). Like all XBRL taxonomies, XBRL GL is 
extensible to meet the diverse needs of internal reporting.  
                                                             
2 Regulatory reporting costs are reduc ed when government agencies converge their reporting requirements as was achieved 
when the Bank Call Report process was modernized (XBRL Intl. 2006).  
3 The modular taxonomies that comprise XBRL GL are: Core, Advanced Business Concepts, MultiCurrency, conce pts for 
Saxonic jurisdictions and the tax audit file. While the use of all modules is not required, it is helpful to view each module  as 
part of the whole.  The Special Issue on Business, Humanities and Social Science                                  © Centre for Promoting Ideas, USA  
4  
This is particularly important in the area of internal reporting and sharing information across the supply chain as 
there is greater diversity at the internal and supply chain levels because they a re not governed by external 
reporting requirements. Because the internally -generated taxonomy extensions will need to be maintained 
indefinitely in the same manner as external taxonomies to provide a stable reference, it is important to plan 
carefully to r educe the number of changes needed. 4 With sufficient forethought the extended taxonomy will 
likely require minimal periodic changes.  Corporations will need to look to the IASC and XBRL International for 
best practices regarding both taxonomy and schema ver sioning.  XBRL GL has the potential to change how 
information is consolidated and shared within an organization, and along the financial information supply chain 
and not just for financial reporting; it may include tax, sustainability, statistics, and manag ement reporting. 
Consequently, it has the potential to provide support for both financial reporting and the audit process, acting as a 
catalyst for change in these areas as well. Organizations (e.g., Wacoal, Inc., Housing and Urban Development 
(HUD) and Fu jitsu Limited) that embrace XBRL GL are likely to gain strategic benefits by leveraging their 
business rules.  
 
A significant benefit offered by XBRL (both FR and GL) is that it provides a method to express semantic 
meaning and a means to validate the conte nt of an instance document against that semantic meaning based upon 
taxonomy defined relationships. XBRL GL provides the ability to validate business rules and formulas at various 
levels within the organization. The use of built -in validations can be achie ved through the use of type tags, 
linkbase validations (i.e., calculation and formula linkbases), XML Schema restrictions, and Schematron. 5 
Additional benefits of XBRL GL are that it (1) supports consolidations across disparate accounting systems 
within an organization, (2) supports financial reporting by linking the financial statement elements to the 
underlying details, and (3) provides a f lexible ―language‖ of data interchange through extensibility. XBRL GL 
will ―help make even the most integrated system more interoperable, and data more reusable, in a cost -effective 
way‖ (Garbellotto 2006, 60).  
 
Like other XBRL taxonomies, XBRL GL was cons tructed from a brute -force approach designed to fit current 
accounting systems rather than built from a fundamental ontological perspective that could be encoded into a 
taxonomy. However, the nature of its construction does not hinder XBRL GL‘s ability to satisfy Gruber‘s (1995, 
910) criteria of a ―good‖ ontology ( clarity, coherence, extensibility, minimal encoding bias and minimal 
ontological commitments) . In fact, the GL taxonomy achieves (1) clarity through agreed upon definitions, (2) 
coherence through consistent use across time, (3) extensibility by design, (4) the elimination of encoding bias 
through agreed upon definitions and the ability to tag data unbounded by the conveniences of notation, and (5) the 
minimization of ontological commitments by allo wing individuals to instantiate the taxonomy as needed.  
 
Resources Events Agents Enterprise Ontology (REA -EO) 
 
Although double -entry bookkeeping has been used for over 500 years, modern day business transactions are 
increasingly more complex than those of even 50 years ago. As Buder and Koschtial (2009) point out, ―double 
entry bookkeeping cannot store data application neutral‖ due to implied limitations in storing the financial data. 
This can limit the ability of the modern ERP system to provide the necess ary data for decision making. The REA 
model (McCarthy 1982) was initially suggested as a means to overcome the limitations of double entry 
bookkeeping, provide guidance on ―what phenomena should be captured in an enterprise system‖ and offer 
―structuring g uidelines about the way economic phenomena should be assembled into business processes and 
value chain specifications‖ (Geerts and McCarthy 2001). Over time it has evolved from an accounting process 
model to a business process model that can be used by an enterprise to capture all business processes and events.  
 
Partridge (2002) noted that t he REA ontology adds two important aspects to traditional double -entry 
bookkeeping. One important benefit is that it explicitly records both monetary and non -monetary e vents. ―A 
known inadequacy of double -entry bookkeeping is that the ledger is restricted to monetary entries. … In the REA 
model, there is no requirement that economic events record the monetary values of economic resources, and the 
REA model can therefore express exchanges where money is not involved, such as barter trade‖ (Hruby and 
Scheller 2008, 2).  
                                                             
4 The term ―extension‖ refers to providing tags to information not currently contained in the releva nt XBRL 
taxonomy and to overriding any labels, presentation links, or calculations in the existing taxonomy.  
5 A ―schematron is a rule -based validation language for making assertions about the presence or absence of patterns in XML 
trees‖ (Wikipedia 2009).  International Journal of Business and Social Science                               Vol. 2 No. 24 [Special Issue – December 2011]  
5  
Another important benefit is that it explicitly identifies both parties to an economic exchange. ―In double -entry 
bookkeeping, the proprietor – the owner o f the books – is implicit; the trading partners are referred to indirectly as 
owners of the accounts across which the entries are posted, such as creditor and debtor. Making the parties to the 
transaction explicit becomes essential in many situations: in t he supply chain, where a producer or a dominant 
trading partner is interested in monitoring the transactions of other partners in the chain; in internal trading in 
which trading partners are both parts of one entity; and in modeling cooperatives, where a g roup of peers is 
interested in modeling the cooperative as a whole, as well as each member‘s individual contribution to the 
cooperative‖ (Hruby and Scheller 2008).  
 
REA modeling has been discussed as a method for organizational information systems to capture all business 
processes and events including ―any strategically significant business activity management wants to plan, control, 
and/or evaluate‖ (Denna et al. 1998, 365). The REA model‘s comprehensiveness moves it beyond merely 
capturing and report ing on business transactions (economic events) to capturing and reporting on other non -
transactional business events. Typification, which can be related to resources, events or agents, is a conceptual 
abstraction that defines the identifying characteristic s or essence of a concrete set of objects (i.e., an event type 
could be a raw materials purchase). It focuses on the recurring components of business events and shares the 
object -oriented adage of reuse.  Therefore,  typification allows for increased interna l controls through validation 
checks to determine if the components of a particular business event are of an appropriate type.  
 
The REA model is popular in teaching and modeling accounting systems. However, Geerts (1997, 2) noted that 
the traditional ―REA  pattern lacks reusability and extendibility.‖ Geerts and Wang (2007) illustrate this problem 
using the example of a car dealer changing its business practice from not accepting trade -ins to accepting trade -
ins. This change in business practice necessitate s adapting the existing enterprise schema to the new practice. ―As 
a result, the underlying enterprise system must also be recompiled and redeployed, which is often costly and 
inefficient. … timeless REA systems are able to absorb such changes and make ent erprise systems more adaptive‖ 
(Geerts and Wang 2007, 165). The designation of a timeless REA system refers to the extensibility of the system, 
not a system without time. The ability of the system to adapt to changes in the operating environment is consist ent 
with the state -tracking model  of Weber (1997, 135) thereby eliminating an ontological deficit.  
 
The objective of timeless REA systems is to increase the adaptability of enterprise systems by increasing the 
reusability and extendibility of the system. ― Information systems have a data component or information base and 
a data structure or conceptual schema that defines the semantics of the data and the constraints that apply to them 
(ISO 1982). Data structures are typically hardwired into the information s ystem, and changes to them are costly 
and time -consuming, often requiring the creation or modification of table or object class definitions and additional 
programming. On the other hand, data manipulation such as adding a new customer is easy to do and the  cost is 
minimal. The objective of timeless enterprise systems is to enable the accommodation of normal changes in the 
economic activities and business rules of an organization without affecting the underlying data structure and 
programs. … this can be acc omplished by defining semantics and business rules as part of the data component 
and thus allows users, especially nonprogrammers, to change them at runtime‖ (Geerts and Wang 2007,  166).   
 
In order to accomplish this, timeless REA systems first analyze th e ―core concepts underlying the economic 
activities.‖ Once commonalities have been identified, ―specific exchanges‖ are replaced by a ―generic ‗exchange‘ 
association‖ in the timeless REA enterprise schema. ―As a result, the user can record any current or f uture 
exchange between two economic events without making any change to the data structure. However, the increased 
flexibility comes at a price: reduced semantics‖ (Geerts and Wang 2007, 168). In addition, ―business rules …are 
no longer defined as part of the enterprise schema. … The ideal situation would be where the specification of the 
semantics is preserved or even extended while the increased flexibility is maintained. One approach is the use of a 
reflective architecture where the descriptions of the e nterprise schema are integrated as part of the conceptual 
schema‖ (Geerts and Wang 2007, 168 -169). Figure 1 illustrates this approach where the enterprise schema 
description provides a framework for describing the semantics of the enterprise schema instead  of defining them 
directly. This allows semantic descriptions to be updated at run time to accommodate changes in business 
operations without a change to the data structure. Figure 1 also illustrates how extending the conceptual schema 
with ontological spe cifications provides a framework to describe the semantics of the REA -EO as part of the 
information base. Geerts and Wang (2007, 170) note that extending the conceptual schema with ontological 
specification adds value in the following ways:  
 The Special Issue on Business, Humanities and Social Science                                  © Centre for Promoting Ideas, USA  
6  
1. Ontological s pecifications can be used for validation purposes.  
2. Adherence to the REA -EO results in interoperability.  
3. Changes in the ontology itself can easily be accommodated by the architecture.  
4. The explicit definition of the ontology provides additional knowledge that can be  
 used as part of applications.  
 
With the increased attention to internal control resulting from Section 404 of the Sarbanes -Oxley Act of 2002 
(SOX), the enhanced internal control through typification can provide significant benefit to the orga nization.  
 
Figure 1:  
 
Conceptual Schema for Timeless REA Enterprise Systems (Geerts and Wang 2007, 169)  
 
Association
DomainObject
PropertyBusiness 
Rule 
Pattern
Association 
Type
DomainObject
Type
Property 
TypeOntological
Association 
Type
Ontological 
Type
RoleEnterprise SchemaOntological 
Specifications
Enterprise 
Schema Description
Operational Level Knowledge Level (Metadata)
Conceptual Schema0_*
1_*
2_2
1_*
1_*0_*
0_*0_*
0_*
0_*
0_*
0_*0_*0_*1_1
1_1
1_1
1_11_11_10_1
0_11_*
2_21_*
1_*
1_*2_2
 International Journal of Business and Social Science                               Vol. 2 No. 24 [Special Issue – December 2011]  
7  
While a timeless REA enterprise system built using a reflective architecture offers significant benefits in terms of 
adaptability, ―applications built with reflective systems need to access metadata at runtime and are more complex 
to write and need more pr ocessing resources and time‖ (Geerts and Wang 2007). In addition, this type of REA 
system still uses a proprietary approach that does not facilitate the sharing of information since it is not typically 
shared across organizations and can even vary between different systems within the same organization. Efficient 
business operations require timely information sharing between subsidiaries and among trading partners. Using 
the timeless REA -EO model to guide the extension of the XBRL -GL taxonomy is one way of a ddressing this 
need by allowing the sharing of tagged information.  
 
III. EXTENDING THE XBRL GL TAXONOMY WITH THE REA MODEL  
 
REA is focused on business processes ; it does  not have an explicit and comprehensive set of data items 
representing the content of trade documents. XBRL GL provides such a vocabulary; key  benefits of XBRL GL 
include the use of agreed upon definitions for tagged items and extensibility to meet the individualized needs of 
industries and individual organizations. REA provides theoretical  guidance on how to expand that vocabulary in a 
consistent manner when needed. This is where integration of REA and XBRL GL is beneficial.  Garbelloto (2006) 
gives recognition to the need for extensions for jurisdiction, company, and functional add -ons. Fi gure 2 illustrates 
how the different modules of the GL taxonomy can be combined with company specific extensions. The need to 
extend the XBRL GL taxonomy to meet the specific requirements of the enterprise necessitates a determination of 
how to accomplish this task. Further any extensions should be designed to maintain the objectives of XBRL GL. 
Using fundamental ontological and design principles to guide these extensions will maintain the GL objectives, 
prolong the usability of the extensions, and likely r educe not only the time but the costs of implementation and 
maintenance.  
 
Figure 2:  
XBRL GL, The Journal Taxonomy Framework (XBRL Intl. 2005)  
 
 
In order to maximize the potential benefits of XBRL GL, the organization must  determine which financial and 
non-financial information to capture. We propose using the timeless REA -EO model to guide the taxonomy 
extension process. By using the timeless REA -EO model it is possible to develop a more complete set of data tags 
that will  allow better leverage of organizational business rules than would likely be possible with an ad hoc 
extension process.  XBRL GL Core  XBRL GL Advanced 
US/UK Accounting  XBRL GL Advanced 
Business Facts  XBRL GL 
Multicurrency  XBRL GL  
Other Modules  
XBRL GL Palette  
(Company Extension)  
XBRL Instance 
Documents  The Special Issue on Business, Humanities and Social Science                                  © Centre for Promoting Ideas, USA  
8  
The timeless REA -EO model is appropriate for several reasons. First, like REA -EO the underlying XBRL GL 
taxonomy is based on Resources , Events, and Agents. XBRL GL captures the Resources within the ‗measurable‘ 
structure, the participation relationship (i.e., Agents) within the ‗identifierReference‘ structure, and the duality 
relationship (i.e., Events) at the ‗entryDetail‘ level then it  ties the structures together through the value -chain. For 
example, both the company and the external agent are tagged in a purchase transaction. Second, XBRL GL is 
designed to tag both economic and non -economic data which is consistent with the REA model.  For example, we 
can capture and record information about sales and successful sales calls. Third, both build internal controls into 
the system.  Fourth, both leverage reusability.  Fifth, both believe that the information from calculated fields 
should not  be stored.  Sixth, neither requires the use of accounts. Therefore, it is only logical that REA be used to 
guide the extension process so that the extensions are consistent with the existing GL taxonomy. REA provides a 
process for modeling the information  and XBRL GL provides a means to capture and share the information. By 
addressing the question of what common information to represent across organizations and what nuances to 
represent within the organization, REA  can help to guide extensions, modifications, and implementations of the 
XBRL GL taxonomy.  
 To illustrate the process we will build on the Geerts and Wang (2007) Exhibit 7 ―Conceptual Schema for 
Timeless REA Enterprise Systems‖ (illustrated in our Figure 1) using the domain objects from the Geerts and 
Wang (2007) Exhibit 4 as modified in our Figure 3 to include the internal agent salesperson. It should be noted 
that it is also possible to include the Ontological Specification in the taxonomy extension. 6  
 
Figure 3:  
 
REA Enterprise Schema: Economic Activities of a Car Dealer accepting Trade -Ins (adapted from Geerts 
and Wang (2007, 166) Exhibit 4)  
 
Car
CashTrade
Sale
Cash ReceiptCustomer
(Outside Agent)
Salesperson
(Inside Agent)duality
duality
Stock-flow
(inflow)
Customer
(Outside Agent)
Repeated to make it easier 
to read cardinalities.Stock-flow
(inflow)
Stock-flow
(outflow)(1,1)(0,1)
(0,1)
(1,1)(1,*)
(0,1)
(0,1)
(0,*)
(1,*)
(1,*)(0,*)
Participation Participation ParticipationParticipationParticipation  Participation
(0,*)
(0,*)(0,*)
(0,*)
(0,*)(1,1)
(1,1)(1,1)(1,1)
(1,1)
(1,1)
 
                                                             
6 We left Ontological Specifications out of the taxonomy extension for simplicity purposes.  International Journal of Business and Social Science                               Vol. 2 No. 24 [Special Issue – December 2011]  
9  
It is necessary to identify structures already present in the XBRL GL taxonomy before be ginning the extension 
process. The GL type tags use drop -downs to limit the choices to valid types. For example, the XBRL GL Core 
Taxonomy contains the ‗documentType‘ element which includes choices such as ‗order -customer,‘ ‗order -
vendor,‘ and ‗invoice.‘ T he use of ‗documentType‘ allows us to define the ‗Association Types‘ from the 
Enterprise Schema. We would need to modify the enumerated choices to include trades, which is industry 
specific. Section 2.5.3 of the General Ledger Taxonomy Framework Technical Architecture  (XBRL Intl. 2007a) 
describes how to modify the enumerated values in the relevant content taxonomy file (i.e., gl-xxx-content -2005 -
11-07.xsd where xxx refers to cor, bus, muc, usk, or taf).  The existing XBRL GL taxonomy makes use of tuples 
to bind information together. For example, all of the information about a customer, such as customer number, 
name, address, and phone number would be bound together. The use of tuples will allow us to bind the ‗property 
type‘ data to the ‗domain object type.‘  
 
It is important that taxonomy extensions are consistent with the existing XBRL GL taxonomy. Extensions should 
be created that look beyond creating elements that are quick -fix and limited use. One way to accomplish this is 
the use of existing standards. ISO/PRF 3779 specifies the structure for vehicle identification numbers. For 
example, the elements ‗make,‘ ‗model,‘ and ‗year‘ are captured in ISO/PRF 3779 ―Road Vehicles --Vehicle 
Identification Number ( VIN) ‖  (ISO 2009).  Relying on an existing standard increases the consistency of data 
tagging by not having individual companies create unique extensions.  
 
‗Property type‘ defines the name, role, and data type. We can define the data type (e.g., integer,  string, or date) for 
an element in the taxonomy. The GL Core Taxonomy already defines the element ‗amount.‘ The meaning for 
‗amount‘ is determined by the source journal; therefore, ‗amount‘ from the sales journal would be the amount of 
the sale and from t he cash receipts journal would be the amount of the receipt. Therefore it would not be 
necessary to extend the taxonomy for the trade amount. While not necessary, if desired, the ‗Description‘ tag 
could be used to provide additional information about the a mount which like ‗amount‘ takes on meaning based on 
where it appears in the instance document. The GL ‗identifierType‘ element allows an automated system to 
understand who is being described within the context of this entry. For example, by knowing the ide ntifier type 
‗v,‘ ‗c,‘ or ‗e‘ we know the information that follows, such as, number, name, and address, correspond to 
information about a vendor, customer, or an employee, respectively.  
 
XBRL GL has the potential to overcome the complexity and performance decreases inherent with the reflective 
architecture of the timeless REA -EO schema through the use of data tags that maintain the metadata. The 
resulting extension should be reusable, consistent, and developed in a logical manner that will withstand the tes t 
of time. The REA infused taxonomy extension will capture a more complete set of business information (e.g., 
type of salesperson, type of trade) and XBRL will allow us to use that information across disparate reporting 
systems. By capturing additional inf ormation such as salesperson or trade type we can perform additional 
business rule validations. By using XBRL GL , if the owners of the car dealership had multiple dealerships they 
would be able to consolidate the data across platforms that likely vary by t he dealership make (e.g., Ford, GM, or 
Honda). In addition, they could share information with the auto manufacturer and lenders. The business rules can 
be changed in the information base allowing increased flexibility to capture the ever changing business 
environment. Internal controls are improved through instantiations being validated against the type tags.  
 
To summarize, our proposal addresses some of the problems that have been encountered in trying to implement 
the use of XBRL GL (e.g., XML‘s lack of s emantics) by guiding the development of taxonomies and customized 
extensions in a rational and systematic manner in accordance with the REA -EO. The result of combining the 
XBRL GL and the REA -EO allows organizations to develop taxonomy extensions that main tain the essential 
characteristics of ―good‖ ontologies as discussed in Gruber (1993) --clarity, coherence, extensibility, minimal 
encoding bias and minimal ontological commitments. Current technology is sufficient to implement our proposal 
For example, Alt ova MapForce and Fujitsu‘s Taxonomy Editor and Instance Creator with the available XBRL GL 
add-in can be used to map the information from the company database to the XBRL GL taxonomy.  
 
IV. CONCLUSIONS  
 
Given the rapid growth and implementation of XBRL it is important to consider all aspects, from taxonomy 
development through taxonomy use, reporting and consumption. Because of the fundamental impact of taxonomy 
development on subsequent use and consumptio n we undertake the process of examining how REA -EO can be 
used to serve as the modeling grammar for XBRL GL taxonomy extensions.   The Special Issue on Business, Humanities and Social Science                                  © Centre for Promoting Ideas, USA  
10  
The syner gies available from the combination of REA and XBRL (i.e., reusability, extensibility, and 
interoperability) can be nefit organizations worldwide. Our paper examines how using the REA -EO as a structured 
framework to guide XBRL GL taxonomy extensions, such as company specific extensions, will maintain 
consistency and inherent benefits such as gains in adaptability, reusa bility, extensibility, and interoperability. This 
approach acknowledges the importance of having a business reporting system capable of efficiently capturing and 
communicating key financial and non -financial business information and performance measures wi thin a firm and 
across the business supply chain. Recognizing the weaknesses of traditional business reporting systems in 
performing this task while adhering to the needs of the organization, we propose using REA to extend the XBRL 
GL taxonomy to address t hose needs.  
 
REA provides a model for determining what information should be captured and how it should be tied together 
while XBRL GL provides the technology to share that information among disparate systems. This is true both in 
the case of a fully deve loped timeless REA system tagged in XBRL GL and in the case of legacy systems tagged 
in XBRL GL with extensions guided by REA. Further investigation and development are needed in order to fully 
realize the potential complimentary benefits of REA and XBRL G L. During the interim, incremental benefits can 
still be achieved.  Utilizing REA to guide the XBRL GL taxonomy extension process within the organization 
could also have the added benefit of advancing management‘s understanding of their organization and id entifying 
opportunities for improvements in operations. Information is the key to success in today‘s fast -paced global 
marketplace. Being able to use information to act and react quickly allows an organization to gain a strategic 
advantage over its competi tors. A primary benefit to be derived from combining REA and XBRL GL lies in 
tagging and sharing information at the economic event level and using that information to make smarter, faster 
decisions.  
 
References  
 
Buder, J. and C. Koschtial. 2009. Formaliza tion of REA Ontology. Proceedings of the Fifteenth  Americas 
Conference on Information Systems, San Francisco, California, August 6 - 9, 2009.  
Cheh, J. J. 2005. A Conceptual Model for Accounting Education: An Accounting  
Curriculum based on a Scientific App roach. The Accounting Educator  14(3): 25 -27.  
Debreceny, R. and G. Gray. 2003. Building XBRL Taxonomies: An Ontological Analysis. Working Paper.  
Denna, E. L., L. T. Perry, and J. Jasperson. 1998. Reengineering and REAL business process modeling. In 
Busines s Process Change: Reengineering Concepts, Methods and Technologies , edited by M. Khosrowpour 
and J. Travers, 350 -375. Hershey, PA: Idea Group Publishing.  
Garbellotto, G. 2006. Exposing enterprise data: XBRL GL, web services, and Google, part 1. Strategic F inance  
(August): 59 -61. 
Geerts, G. L. 1997. The timeless way of building accounting information systems: The ‗activity‘ pattern. In 
OOPSLA Workshop on Business Object Design and Implementation.  
——— . and ——— . 2001. Using object templates from the REA accounting model to engineer business 
processes and tasks. The Review of Business Information Systems 5 (4): 89 –108.  
——— . and ——— . 2004. The ontological foundation of REA enterprise information syste ms. Working paper, 
Michigan State University. Available at: http://www.msu.edu/user/mccarth4/ Last accessed June 19, 2009.  
——— , and H. J. Wang. 2007. The timeless way of building REA enterprise systems. Journal of Emerging 
Technologies in Accounting  4:161 -182.  
Gruber, T. R. 1992. What is an ontology?  Available from: http://www -ksl.stanford.edu/kst/what -is-an-
ontology .html. Last Accessed June 14, 2009.  
——— . 1993. A Translation Approach to Portable Ontology Specifications. Knowledge Acquisition  5(2):199 -
220.  
——— . 1995. Toward Principles for the Design of Ontologies Used for Knowledge Sharing. International 
Journal Human -Computer Studies 43 (5 -6) (November): 907 -928. 
Hruby, P. J. and C.V. Scheller. 2008. Understanding accounting from the REA per spective. Position paper. 
Available at: http://www.managementinformation.ugent.be/ REAworkshop2008/Montpellier.pdf, last 
accessed June 2, 2008.  
Ijiri, Y. 1975. Theory of Accounting Measurement . American Accounting Association.  International Journal of Business and Social Science                               Vol. 2 No. 24 [Special Issue – December 2011]  
11  
International Standards Orga nization. April 7, 2009. ISO/PRF 3779 Road Vehicles -Vehicle identification 
number .Available from:  http://iso.org/iso/iso_catalogue/catalogue_ics/catalogue_detail_ics.htm?csnumber=52200. 
Last accessed June 19, 2009.  
McCarthy, W. E. 1982. The REA accounting  model: A generalized framework for accounting systems in a shared 
data environment. The Accounting Review  57 (3): 554 -578. 
Partridge, C. 2002. A new foundation for accounting: Steps towards the development of a reference ontology for 
accounting, Technical  Report 23/02, LADSEB -CNR , Padova, Italy.  
Scheller, C. V. and P. Hruby. 2009. IS POA (Possession, Ownership, Availability) the Precise Semantics of REA? 
Proceedings of the VMBO Workshop , February 8 -9, Stockholm, Sweden.  
SEC. 2009. Interactive Data to Improve Financial Reporting . Securities and Exchange  
Commission, April 1, 2009. Available from  
http://www.sec.gov/rules/final/2009/339002a.pdf . Last Accessed May 15, 2009.  
Ushold, M. and M. Gruninger. 1996. Ontologies: Principles, Methods and Applications,  The Knowledge 
Engineering Review  11(2): 93 -136. 
Weber, R. A. 1997. Ontological Foundations of Information Systems . Melbourne: Coopers and Lybrand.  
——— . 2002. Ontological Issues in Accounting Information Systems. In Research Accounting as an Information 
Systems Discipline . Arnold, V. and S. Sutton editors. Sarasota, FL: American Accounting Association.  
Wikipedia. 2009. Schematron. Available from:  http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Schematron. Last accessed June 19, 
2009.  
XBRL International, Inc. 2005. GL Tutori al. Available from:  http://xbrl.org/us/nmpxbrl.aspx?id=45. Last 
accessed June 19, 2009.  
——— . 2006. Improved Business Process through XBRL: A use case for business reporting . 
http://xbrl.org/Business/Regulators/FFIEC -White -Paper -31Jan06.pdf. Last accessed June 20, 2009.  
——— . 2007a. GL Taxonomy Framework Technical Architecture . (April 17). Fedor, J. and H. Wallis editors. 
Available from: http://www.xbrl.org/int/gl/2007 -04-17/GLFramework -REC -2007 -04-17.htm. Last accessed 
June 19, 2009.  
——— . 2007b. XBRL Global  Ledger Framework – SRCD Module – Public Working Draft Overview (May 23). 
Garbellotto G. and E. Cohen Editors. Available from: http://www.xbrl.org/int/gl/2007 -05-23/XBRL -Global -
Ledger -Framework -SRCD -PWD -2007 -05-23.rtf.  
——— . 2009a. An Introduction to XBRL. Available from: http://xbrl.org/frontend.aspx?clk=LK&val=20 . Last 
accessed June 19, 2009.  
——— . 2009b. Global Ledger Taxonomy -An Introduction. Available from: http://xbrl.org/GLTaxonomy. Last 
accessed June 19, 2009.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 