The Zachman Framework 
ENTERPRISE ARCHITECT
User Guide Series
Author: Sparx Systems
Date:  10/11/2023
Version: 16.1
CREATED WITH
Table of Contents
The Zachman Framework 3
Brief Introduction 4
Support for the Zachman Framework 5
Zachman Framework System Requirements 6
Getting Started with Zachman 7
Licencing Copyright and Trademarks 8
Zachman Framework Copyright Notice 9
MDG Technology for Zachman Framework Software Product License Agreement 10
Acknowledgement of Trademarks 12
Using the Zachman Framework 13
The Zachman Framework Interface Diagram 14
Zachman Framework Model Structure 15
The Zachman Framework Model Template 17
Zachman Framework Diagrams 18
Zachman Framework Diagram Types 19
The Zachman Framework Toolbox 20
Business Data Page 22
Business Process Pages 23
Business Location Page 24
Business Motivation Pages 25
Organization Chart Pages 26
Business Events Pages 28
Data Map Pages 29
Business Logistics Pages 30
BPMN Pages 32
Event Schedule Pages 34
Strategy Map Pages 35
Data Distribution Architecture Pages 36
Business Rule Model Pages 37
Rule Design Pages 39
Network Architecture Pages 40
Rule Specification Pages 41
Tagged Values for Zachman Framework 42
Data Map Analysis 43
Cluster Report 45
Process Map 47
Business Scorecard Report Template 48
Model Validation 49
Validation Messages for Elements 50
Validation Messages for Connectors 51
Validation Messages for Diagrams 52The Zachman Framework 10 November, 2023
The Zachman Framework
The Zachman Framework is a widely used approach for engineering Enterprise Architecture. The Framework is a simple,
logical structure that helps in organizing the information infrastructure of the Enterprise and provides many benefits in
helping align technology with business needs.
Discussion
The topics described here provide an introduction to, and procedural explanation of, using the Zachman Framework in
Enterprise Architect.
Section Content
Welcome
 This section provides an introduction to the Zachman Framework, and contains the
formal documentation defining its use with Enterprise Architect.
Using the Zachman
Framework
Get started with the Zachman Framework, learning about the model structure,
templates, diagram types and more.
Model Validation
 Learn how to develop and configure model validation for the Zachman Framework.
(c) Sparx Systems 2023 Page  3 of 53 Created with Enterprise ArchitectThe Zachman Framework 10 November, 2023
Brief Introduction
Welcome to the Zachman Framework in Enterprise Architect.
Using this technology with Enterprise Architect, you can employ the Zachman Framework with the associated benefits
of a multi-featured, open-standard modeling system. The Zachman Framework is already integrated with the Ultimate
and Unified Editions; it can be purchased separately to be used with the Enterprise Architect Professional or Corporate
Editions.
About the Zachman Framework
The Zachman Framework is a widely used approach for engineering Enterprise Architecture. The Framework is a simple,
logical structure that helps in organizing the information infrastructure of the Enterprise.
While conceptually simple, the Zachman Framework provides many benefits in helping align technology with business
needs. It has become a popular approach in defining Enterprise Architecture because it:
Is platform neutral ·
Is a versatile planning device ·
Is both comprehensive and readily understood by non-technical people ·
Assists in problem solving ·
Helps in documenting enterprise-wide information system architecture ·
Under the Zachman Framework, an Enterprise is modeled by answering six questions: What? How? Where? Who?
When? and Why? with respect to six role perspectives: the Planner, Owner, Designer, Builder, Subcontractor and
Functioning Enterprise.
For further information, visit the Zachman Framework website.
Getting Started
For instructions on how to use the Zachman Framework, see the topics:
Getting Started with the Zachman Framework and ·
Using the Zachman Framework ·
(c) Sparx Systems 2023 Page  4 of 53 Created with Enterprise ArchitectThe Zachman Framework 10 November, 2023
Support for the Zachman Framework
Technical support for the Zachman Framework is available to registered users of Enterprise Architect through the same
channels as for Enterprise Architect itself.
(c) Sparx Systems 2023 Page  5 of 53 Created with Enterprise ArchitectThe Zachman Framework 10 November, 2023
Zachman Framework System Requirements
Zachman Framework version 1.1.4 runs under the environments identified here.
Microsoft® Operating Systems Supported
Windows 10 ·
Windows 8 ·
Windows 7 ·
Windows 2008 Server ·
Windows 2003 Server ·
Windows XP Service Pack 2 ·
Enterprise Architect Versions Supported
Enterprise Architect Version 7.1 or later ·
Notes
32 bit and 64 bit operating systems supported ·
(c) Sparx Systems 2023 Page  6 of 53 Created with Enterprise ArchitectThe Zachman Framework 10 November, 2023
Getting Started with Zachman
When you install the Unified or Ultimate Edition of Enterprise Architect, the Zachman Framework is fully enabled and
ready to use.
If you have the Corporate or Professional Edition of Enterprise Architect, you can purchase and install the MDG
Technology for Zachman Framework separately; once you have entered the registration key for the MDG Technology
for Zachman Framework, it is automatically available in and integrated with Enterprise Architect, as for the Unified and
Ultimate Editions.
Access the MDG Technology For Zachman Framework
Create a new Enterprise Architect project file, and click on the top-level Package. 1.
Select the 'Design > Package > Model Wizard' option. 2.
In the 'Create from Pattern' tab (Model Wizard), select the  'Enterprise Architecture > Zachman' Perspective and the 3.
'Zachman Framework' Pattern.
Click on the Create Model(s) button. 4.
A new base Zachman model is created in the Browser window, containing the Zachman Framework diagram and the
Planner, Owner, Designer, Builder, Subcontractor and Functioning Enterprise Packages.
(c) Sparx Systems 2023 Page  7 of 53 Created with Enterprise ArchitectThe Zachman Framework 10 November, 2023
Licencing Copyright and Trademarks
(c) Sparx Systems 2023 Page  8 of 53 Created with Enterprise ArchitectThe Zachman Framework 10 November, 2023
Zachman Framework Copyright Notice
Copyright © 2007-2022 Sparx Systems Pty. Ltd. All rights reserved.
The MDG Technology for Zachman Framework software contains proprietary information of Sparx Systems Pty Ltd. It
is provided under a license agreement containing restrictions on use and disclosure and is also protected by copyright
law. Reverse engineering of the software is prohibited. Please read the product license agreement for full details.
Due to continued product development, this information may change without notice. The information and intellectual
property contained herein is confidential between Sparx Systems and the client and remains the exclusive property of
Sparx Systems. If you find any problems in the documentation, please report them to us in writing. Sparx Systems does
not warrant that this document is error-free. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system,
or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise without the
prior written permission of Sparx Systems. Licensed users are granted the right to print a single hardcopy of the user
manual per licensed copy of the software, but may not sell, distribute or otherwise dispose of the hardcopy without
written consent of Sparx Systems.
Sparx Systems Pty. Ltd.
99 Albert St,
Creswick, Victoria 3363,
AUSTRALIA
Phone: +61 (3) 5345 1140
Fax: +61 (3) 5345 1104
Support Email: support@sparxsystems.com
Sales Email: sales@sparxsystems.com
Website: sparxsystems.com
(c) Sparx Systems 2023 Page  9 of 53 Created with Enterprise ArchitectThe Zachman Framework 10 November, 2023
MDG Technology for Zachman Framework Software
Product License Agreement
This Software Product License Agreement relates to the separately-purchased MDG Technology for Zachman
Framework for use with the Professional and Corporate Editions of Sparx Systems Enterprise Architect. The MDG
Technology integrated with the Unified and Ultimate Editions of Enterprise Architect is subject to the Sparx Systems 
Enterprise Architect Modelling Tool.
MDG Technology for Zachman Framework - Enterprise Architect MDG Add-In, Version 1.1
Copyright © 2007-2022 Sparx Systems Pty Ltd. All Rights Reserved
IMPORTANT-READ CAREFULLY: This End User License Agreement ("EULA") is a legal agreement between YOU
as Licensee and SPARX for the SOFTWARE PRODUCT identified above. By installing, copying, or otherwise using the
SOFTWARE PRODUCT, YOU agree to be bound by the terms of this EULA. If YOU do not agree to the terms of this
EULA, promptly delete the unused SOFTWARE PRODUCT.
The copyright in the SOFTWARE PRODUCT and its documentation is owned by Sparx Systems Pty Ltd, A.B.N 38 085
034 546. Subject to the terms of this EULA, YOU are granted a non-exclusive right for the duration of the EULA to use
the SOFTWARE PRODUCT. YOU do not acquire ownership of copyright or other intellectual property rights in any
part of the SOFTWARE PRODUCT by virtue of this EULA.
Your use of this software indicates your acceptance of this EULA and warranty.
DEFINITIONS
In this End User License Agreement, unless the contrary intention appears,
"EULA" means this End User License Agreement ·
"SPARX" means Sparx Systems Pty Ltd A.C.N 085 034 546 ·
"Licensee" means YOU, or the organization (if any) on whose behalf YOU are taking the EULA ·
"Registered Edition of MDG Technology for Zachman Framework" means the edition of the SOFTWARE ·
PRODUCT which is available for purchase from the web site:
https://sparxsystems.com/products/mdg/tech/zachman/purchase.html
"SOFTWARE PRODUCT" or "SOFTWARE" means MDG Technology for Zachman Framework, which includes ·
computer software and associated media and printed materials, and may include online or electronic documentation
"Support Services" means email-based support provided by SPARX, including advice on usage of Enterprise ·
Architect, investigation of bugs, fixes, repairs of models, if and when appropriate, and general product support
"SPARX support engineers" means employees of SPARX who provide on-line support services ·
GRANT OF LICENSE
In accordance with the terms of this EULA YOU are granted the following rights:
To install and use ONE copy of the SOFTWARE PRODUCT or, in its place, any prior version for the same ·
operating system, on a single computer; as the primary user of the computer on which the SOFTWARE PRODUCT
is installed, YOU may make a second copy for your exclusive use on either a home or portable computer
To store or install a copy of the SOFTWARE PRODUCT on a storage device, such as a network server, used only to ·
install or run the SOFTWARE PRODUCT over an internal network
To make copies of the SOFTWARE PRODUCT for backup, archival and instructional purposes ·
(c) Sparx Systems 2023 Page 10 of 53 Created with Enterprise ArchitectThe Zachman Framework 10 November, 2023
EVALUATION LICENSE
The Trial Edition of MDG Technology for Zachman Framework is not free software. Subject to the terms of this
agreement, YOU are hereby licensed to use this software for evaluation purposes without charge for a period of thirty
(30) days.
Upon expiration of the thirty (30) days, the SOFTWARE PRODUCT must be removed from the computer. Unregistered
use of MDG Technology for Zachman Framework after the 30-day evaluation period is in violation of Australian, U.S.
and international copyright laws.
SPARX may extend the evaluation period on request and at their discretion.
If YOU choose to use this software after the 30 day evaluation period a license must be purchased (as described at
https://sparxsystems.com/products/mdg/tech/zachman/purchase.html). Upon payment of the license fee, YOU will be
sent details on where to download the registered edition of MDG Technology for Zachman Framework and will be
provided with a suitable software 'key' by email.
ADDITIONAL RIGHTS AND LIMITATIONS
YOU hereby undertake not to sell or sub-licence the SOFTWARE PRODUCT other than as expressly authorized by this
EULA.
NO WARRANTY. The SOFTWARE PRODUCT is provided "AS IS", without warranty of any kind, and SPARX
expressly disclaims all warranties and/or conditions with respect to the SOFTWARE PRODUCT, either express, implied
or statutory, including, but not limited to, the implied warranties and/or conditions of merchantability, of satisfactory
quality, of fitness for a particular purpose, of accuracy, of quiet enjoyment, and of non-infringement of third party rights.
LIMITATION
Under no circumstances shall SPARX be liable for any incidental, special, indirect or consequential damages arising out
of or relating to this license or YOUR use, reproduction, modification, distribution of the SOFTWARE PRODUCT, or
any portion thereof, whether under a theory of contract, warranty, strict liability or otherwise, even if the copyright
holder has been advised of the possibility of such damages and notwithstanding the failure of essential purpose of any
remedy.
TRADEMARKS
All names of products and companies used in this EULA, the SOFTWARE PRODUCT, or the enclosed documentation
can be trademarks of their corresponding owners. Their use in this EULA is intended to be in compliance with the
respective guidelines and licenses.
The Zachman Framework for Enterprise ArchitectureTM is a trademark of John A. Zachman and Zachman International.
GOVERNING LAW
This agreement shall be construed in accordance with the laws of the Commonwealth of AUSTRALIA, in the state of
Victoria.
(c) Sparx Systems 2023 Page 11 of 53 Created with Enterprise ArchitectThe Zachman Framework 10 November, 2023
Acknowledgement of Trademarks
Sparx Systems acknowledge these trademarks, which are used throughout the MDG for Zachman Framework
documentation.
Trademarks of Microsoft
Microsoft Word ·
Microsoft Office ·
Windows® ·
Trademarks of the Object Management Group
Object Management Group TM ·
OMG TM ·
UML TM ·
Unified Modeling Language TM ·
Trademark of John A. Zachman and Zachman International
The Zachman Framework For Enterprise Architecture TM ·
(c) Sparx Systems 2023 Page 12 of 53 Created with Enterprise ArchitectThe Zachman Framework 10 November, 2023
Using the Zachman Framework
The Zachman Framework provides a model-based framework for planning, designing and implementing the Architecture
for an Enterprise. The starter model provided with the Technology acts as a base upon which you can build the
Enterprise Architecture. You can create the appropriate diagrams from the extended Enterprise Architect UML diagram
set, using Toolbox pages that support every cell of the Zachman classification framework.
The Technology also provides model validation and reporting capabilities for strategic project plans.
Within Enterprise Architect you can choose between Diagram View and Element List View. Element List View can be
used in cells where you prefer to define only the model artifacts.
You can also align cells across the framework (horizontally and vertically) through the Enterprise Architect Relationship
Matrix.
You can view a demonstration video of the MDG Technology For Zachman Framework in use, on the Sparx Systems
website.
The Zachman Framework Help topics provide a detailed exploration of the Zachman Framework tools and features, such
as.
The example Enterprise Architect model for the Zachman Framework ·
UML profiles (Toolbox pages) for use within specific Zachman Framework cells ·
A diagram interface for the Zachman Framework ·
New diagram types specific to the Zachman Framework ·
A flexible model starter-structure ·
Report generation capabilities for strategic project plans ·
The MDG Technology For Zachman Framework is integrated with the features of Enterprise Architect.
(c) Sparx Systems 2023 Page 13 of 53 Created with Enterprise ArchitectThe Zachman Framework 10 November, 2023
The Zachman Framework Interface Diagram
The Zachman Framework is a predefined model in Enterprise Architect. The model-level diagram of the model structure
is the Zachman Framework Interface diagram, which serves as a template for the development of Enterprise Architecture
based on the Zachman classification framework.
Each cell links to the relevant Zachman Framework diagram in the child Packages in the base model.
(c) Sparx Systems 2023 Page 14 of 53 Created with Enterprise ArchitectThe Zachman Framework 10 November, 2023
Zachman Framework Model Structure
The Zachman Framework provides a Framework model template, in which each Zachman Perspective (or row) is
modeled as the highest-level Package inside the model. Cells belonging to the Perspectives are modeled as child
Packages of the appropriate row Package.
(c) Sparx Systems 2023 Page 15 of 53 Created with Enterprise ArchitectThe Zachman Framework 10 November, 2023
(c) Sparx Systems 2023 Page 16 of 53 Created with Enterprise ArchitectThe Zachman Framework 10 November, 2023
The Zachman Framework Model Template
The Zachman Framework Model Template provides the model skeleton from which you can develop your Enterprise
definition.
Add a new Zachman Framework model to the project
Right-click on the root node and select 'Add a Model using Wizard'. The 'Create from Pattern' tab (Model Wizard) 1.
displays.
On the 'Create from Pattern' tab, click on the <name> Perspective button and select 'Enterprise Architecture > 2.
Zachman' from the list.
Select the 'Zachman Framework' pattern. 3.
Click on the Create Model(s) button. 4.
(c) Sparx Systems 2023 Page 17 of 53 Created with Enterprise ArchitectThe Zachman Framework 10 November, 2023
Zachman Framework Diagrams
The Zachman Framework introduces new diagram types that support modeling of the Zachman Classification
Framework. A Zachman Framework diagram is created in the same way as any other diagram in Enterprise Architect.
The Technology provides access to these categories of diagram through the 'New Diagram' dialog:
Planner·
Owner·
Designer ·
Builder·
Subcontractor ·
Zachman Framework Interface ·
(c) Sparx Systems 2023 Page 18 of 53 Created with Enterprise ArchitectThe Zachman Framework 10 November, 2023
Zachman Framework Diagram Types
The Zachman Framework further extends the Enterprise Architect diagram set to support the Framework, with diagram
types appropriate to each cell of the Zachman Framework.
(c) Sparx Systems 2023 Page 19 of 53 Created with Enterprise ArchitectThe Zachman Framework 10 November, 2023
The Zachman Framework Toolbox
The Zachman Framework pages of the Diagram Toolbox provide elements and relationships for all the Zachman
Framework diagrams that the MDG Technology supports. The Zachman Framework Toolbox pages can be accessed by
clicking on 
  and specifying 'Zachman' in the 'Find Toolbox Item' dialog. The Diagram Toolbox can be docked on
either side of the diagram, or free floated on top of the diagram to expose more surface for editing.
Diagrams for Toolboxes
This table shows, for each Zachman Framework cell, the diagram that could be used.
Zachman Cell Diagram
Planner - Data Business Data
Planner - Function Business Process
Planner - Location Business Locations
Planner - People Organization Chart
Planner - Timing Business Events
Planner - Motivation Business Motivation
Owner - Data Data Map and
Process Map (Generated by Add-In)
Owner - Function Process Analysis
Owner - Location Business Logistics
Owner - People BPMN
Owner - Timing Event Schedule
Owner - Motivation Enterprise Architect Mind Mapping diagram and
Strategy Map
Designer - Data Class
Designer – Function Activity
Designer - Location Data Distribution Architecture
Designer - People Use Case
Designer - Timing State Transition
(c) Sparx Systems 2023 Page 20 of 53 Created with Enterprise ArchitectThe Zachman Framework 10 November, 2023
Designer - Motivation Business Rule Model
Builder - Data Physical Data Model
Builder - Function Class and
Component
Builder - Location Deployment
Builder - People User Interface
Builder - Timing Communication and
Interaction
Builder - Motivation Rule Design
Subcontractor - Data Data Definition; default toolbox for the diagram is Custom.
Subcontractor – Function No diagram defined – Code generation is done in this cell.
Subcontractor - Location Network Architecture
Subcontractor - People Security Architecture
Subcontractor - Timing Timing
Subcontractor - Motivation Rule Specification
(c) Sparx Systems 2023 Page 21 of 53 Created with Enterprise ArchitectThe Zachman Framework 10 November, 2023
Business Data Page
Business Data Toolbox
Item Description
Actor Models a stakeholder or any other human resource of the enterprise.
Asset Represents the enterprise resources that could be estimated for value.
Business Entity Represents generic enterprise resources.
Document Asset A subtype of Asset that captures the important documents of the enterprise.
Equipment Asset A subtype of Asset that captures the equipment resources of the enterprise.
Assumption Captures the assumptions made in information manipulation.
Applies the Tagged Value Type = Enterprise / Business / System / Application /
Technology / Data.
Principle Defines the Principles framed and followed in the enterprise.
Applies the Tagged Value Type = Enterprise / Business / System / Application /
Technology / Data.
Standard Defines the standards followed in the Enterprise.
Applies the Tagged Value Type = Enterprise / Business / System / Application /
Technology / Data.
Notes
Elements and connectors common to Enterprise Architect UML and Extended diagrams are documented in the ·
Object Toolbox section
(c) Sparx Systems 2023 Page 22 of 53 Created with Enterprise ArchitectThe Zachman Framework 10 November, 2023
Business Process Pages
Business Process Toolbox
Item Description
Actor Models a stakeholder or any other human resource of the Enterprise.
Decision Indicates the point of conditional progression where a business decision is taken.
Business Function Represents a major function performed by the enterprise or a part of the enterprise.
Business Process Represents a function or behavior of the enterprise or part of the enterprise.
Business Entity Represents generic enterprise resources.
Invokes A relationship that defines the invocation of a business process.
Notes
Elements and connectors common to Enterprise Architect UML and Extended diagrams are documented in the ·
Object Toolbox section
(c) Sparx Systems 2023 Page 23 of 53 Created with Enterprise ArchitectThe Zachman Framework 10 November, 2023
Business Location Page
Business Location Toolbox
Item Description
Branch Office Models a Business Location as a Branch Office.
Client Place Models a Business Location as a Client Place.
Head Quarters Models a Business Location as a Head Quarters.
Business Location Models the location from which the business operates.
Office Block Models a Business Location as an Office Block.
Sales Agent Models a Business Location as a Sales Agent.
Supplier Models a Business Location as a Supplier.
Notes
Elements and connectors common to Enterprise Architect UML and Extended diagrams are documented in the ·
Object Toolbox section
(c) Sparx Systems 2023 Page 24 of 53 Created with Enterprise ArchitectThe Zachman Framework 10 November, 2023
Business Motivation Pages
Business Motivation Toolbox
Item Description
Goal Models what is to be achieved by the enterprise, with specifications defined by the
Tagged Values.
Mission Models the mission statement, policies and values of the enterprise.
Strategy Models the strategy statements for the business plan.
Assumption Models the assumptions made in information manipulation.
Tagged Value Type = Enterprise / Business / System / Application / Technology /
Data.
Principle Defines the Principles framed and followed in the enterprise.
Tagged Value Type = Enterprise / Business / System / Application / Technology /
Data.
Standard Defines the standards followed in the enterprise.
Tagged Value Type = Enterprise / Business / System / Application / Technology /
Data.
Notes
Elements and connectors common to Enterprise Architect UML and Extended diagrams are documented in the ·
Object Toolbox section
(c) Sparx Systems 2023 Page 25 of 53 Created with Enterprise ArchitectThe Zachman Framework 10 November, 2023
Organization Chart Pages
Organization Chart Toolbox
Item Description
Board of Directors Captures the details of the board of directors.
StakeHolder Defines a stakeholder of the enterprise.
External Organization Defines any external business unit that is not under direct control of the enterprise,
but has a relationship with the enterprise.
Organization Unit Defines any business unit that is under direct control of the enterprise.
Personnel Captures the details of personnel in an enterprise.
In Contract A connector that represents the contract-based relationships between business units.
Works For A connector that captures the details of team links; for example, Stakeholder 1
works for Organization Unit 1.
Supervise A connector that captures process supervision details.
Control A connector that captures Unit in charge or Person in charge information.
Notes
Elements and connectors common to Enterprise Architect UML and Extended diagrams are documented in the ·
Object Toolbox section
(c) Sparx Systems 2023 Page 26 of 53 Created with Enterprise ArchitectThe Zachman Framework 10 November, 2023
(c) Sparx Systems 2023 Page 27 of 53 Created with Enterprise ArchitectThe Zachman Framework 10 November, 2023
Business Events Pages
Business Event Toolbox
Item Description
Business Event Captures major business events of the enterprise.
Trigger Indicates that a Business Event triggers another event or a business process.
(c) Sparx Systems 2023 Page 28 of 53 Created with Enterprise ArchitectThe Zachman Framework 10 November, 2023
Data Map Pages
Data Map Toolbox
Item Description
Principal Entity Represents a business entity that forms a resource of the enterprise.
Intersecting Entity Normalizes the many-to-many relationship between principal entities.
Structure Entity Captures potential knowledge-based entities.
Notes
Elements and connectors common to Enterprise Architect UML and Extended diagrams are documented in the ·
Object Toolbox section
(c) Sparx Systems 2023 Page 29 of 53 Created with Enterprise ArchitectThe Zachman Framework 10 November, 2023
Business Logistics Pages
Business Logistics Items and Relations
Item Description
Branch Office Models a Business Location as a Branch Office.
Client Place Models a Business Location as a Client location
Head Quarters Models a Business Location as Head Quarters.
Business Location Models the location from which the business operates.
Office Block Models a Business Location as an Office Block.
Sales Agent Models a Business Location as a Sales Agent.
Supplier Models a Business Location as a Supplier.
Communicate Indicates that a business location communicates directly with another business
location.
Internet Indicates that the means of communication is the World Wide Web.
Snail Mail Indicates that the means of communication is the postal system or courier services.
Phone Indicates that the means of communication is the telephone.
(c) Sparx Systems 2023 Page 30 of 53 Created with Enterprise ArchitectThe Zachman Framework 10 November, 2023
In Person Indicates that the means of communication is direct person-to-person.
Intranet Indicates that the means of communication is the local intranet or WAN.
Notes
Elements and connectors common to Enterprise Architect UML and Extended diagrams are documented in the ·
Object Toolbox section
(c) Sparx Systems 2023 Page 31 of 53 Created with Enterprise ArchitectThe Zachman Framework 10 November, 2023
BPMN Pages
The BPMN Toolbox pages provide the graphical (Core) and non-graphical (Types) Business Process Model and
Notation (BPMN) elements for use on Business Process diagrams through the Zachman Framework Technology.
Specifications of these elements and relationships are defined by Tagged Values.
BPMN Toolbox
Item Description
Business Process Defines a business process; an extension of a composite Activity.
Activity Defines an activity within a business process.
Start Event Defines the initiating event in a process.
Intermediate Event Defines an intermediate event in a process.
End Event Defines the terminating event in a process.
Gateway Defines a decision point in a business process. If a condition is true, then processing
continues one way; if not, then another.
(c) Sparx Systems 2023 Page 32 of 53 Created with Enterprise ArchitectThe Zachman Framework 10 November, 2023
Pool Logically organizes an Activity; an extension of a Partition element.
Lane Subdivides a Pool; an extension of a Partition element.
Data Object Defines a physical piece of information used or produced by a system; an extension
of an Artifact element.
Group Groups a number of other elements; an extension of a Boundary element.
Text Annotation A comment.
Sequence Flow Defines the flow of an activity; an extension of a Control Flow relationship.
Message Flow Defines the flow of communications in a process; an extension of a Control Flow
relationship.
Association Associates information and artifacts with flow objects.
Message Defines a message; an extension of a Class element.
Participant Defines a participant in an activity; an extension of a Class element.
Rule Defines business rule statements; an extension of a Class element.
Transaction Defines a transaction in an activity; an extension of a Class element.
Web Service Defines a web service; an extension of a Class element.
Property Assigns a property to an element; an extension of an attribute.
Notes
Enterprise Architect is delivered with the BPMN Technologies (for BPMN 1.0. 1.1 and 2.0) automatically installed, ·
providing BPMN profiles and Toolboxes separate from this Zachman version; to make even further use of BPMN
facilities, download the BPMN Add-In from:
https://sparxsystems.com/products/mdg_bpmn.html
(c) Sparx Systems 2023 Page 33 of 53 Created with Enterprise ArchitectThe Zachman Framework 10 November, 2023
Event Schedule Pages
Event Schedule Toolbox
Item Description
Business Event Captures major business events of the enterprise.
Business Cycle Captures major business cycles of the enterprise.
Event Node Captures the event points in a business cycle.
Notes
Elements and connectors common to Enterprise Architect UML and Extended diagrams are documented in the ·
Object Toolbox section
(c) Sparx Systems 2023 Page 34 of 53 Created with Enterprise ArchitectThe Zachman Framework 10 November, 2023
Strategy Map Pages
Strategy Map Toolbox
Item Description
Strategy Captures the strategy statements for the business plan.
Goal Captures what is to be achieved by the enterprise, with specifications defined by the
Tagged Values.
Business Perspective Relates the strategies to a specific category.
Strategy Link Indicates that a strategy is linked to another strategy or goal.
(c) Sparx Systems 2023 Page 35 of 53 Created with Enterprise ArchitectThe Zachman Framework 10 November, 2023
Data Distribution Architecture Pages
Data Distribution Architecture Toolbox
Item Description
File Represents a file.
Desktop Represents a desktop.
Processor Represents a processor.
Registry Represents a registry.
Storage Device Represents a storage device.
Web Service Represents a web service.
Notes
Elements and connectors common to Enterprise Architect UML and Extended diagrams are documented in the ·
Object Toolbox section
(c) Sparx Systems 2023 Page 36 of 53 Created with Enterprise ArchitectThe Zachman Framework 10 November, 2023
Business Rule Model Pages
Business Rule Model Toolbox
Item Description
Business Rule Captures the Business Rule statements.
Principle Defines the Principles framed and followed in the Enterprise.
Tag Value Type = Enterprise / Business / System / Application / Technology /
Data.
Standard Defines the standards followed in the Enterprise.
Tag Value Type = Enterprise / Business / System / Application / Technology /
Data.
Assumption Captures the assumptions made in information manipulation.
Tag Value Type = Enterprise / Business / System / Application / Technology /
Data.
Based On Indicates that a rule is based on another model element, which forms the rationale
for the rule.
Replaces Indicates that a new rule replaces another rule.
Conflict Indicates that a rule conflicts with another defined rule.
Equivalent To Indicates that a rule is equivalent to another rule.
Exception To Indicates exceptions for a rule.
(c) Sparx Systems 2023 Page 37 of 53 Created with Enterprise ArchitectThe Zachman Framework 10 November, 2023
Notes
Elements and connectors common to Enterprise Architect UML and Extended diagrams are documented in the ·
Object Toolbox section
(c) Sparx Systems 2023 Page 38 of 53 Created with Enterprise ArchitectThe Zachman Framework 10 November, 2023
Rule Design Pages
Rule Design Toolbox
Item Description
Formal Rule Represents a business rule transformed to a technology-specific logical rule or
constraint statement.
Principle Defines the Principles framed and followed in the Enterprise.
Tag Value Type = Enterprise / Business / System / Application / Technology /
Data.
Standard Used to define the Standards followed in the Enterprise.
Tag Value Type = Enterprise / Business / System / Application / Technology /
Data.
Assumption Used to capture the assumptions made in information manipulation.
Tag Value Type = Enterprise / Business / System / Application / Technology /
Data.
Applied To Indicates that a Formal Rule is applied to other model artifacts such as Scenarios or
Activities.
Validates Indicates that a model artifact validates a Formal Rule.
Notes
Elements and connectors common to Enterprise Architect UML and Extended diagrams are documented in the ·
Object Toolbox section
(c) Sparx Systems 2023 Page 39 of 53 Created with Enterprise ArchitectThe Zachman Framework 10 November, 2023
Network Architecture Pages
Network Architecture Toolbox
Item Description
Artifact Generic graphical element used to capture information.
Document Artifact Generic graphical element used to capture detailed information such as network
configuration details.
Notes
For a full description of Artifact elements, see the Artifact topic ·
(c) Sparx Systems 2023 Page 40 of 53 Created with Enterprise ArchitectThe Zachman Framework 10 November, 2023
Rule Specification Pages
Rule Specification Toolbox
Item Description
Rule Impl Component Captures the component implementing a rule.
Principle Defines the Principles framed and followed in the enterprise.
Tag Value Type = Enterprise / Business / System / Application / Technology /
Data.
Standard Defines the Standards followed in the enterprise.
Tag Value Type = Enterprise / Business / System / Application / Technology /
Data.
Assumption Captures the assumptions made in information manipulation.
Tag Value Type = Enterprise / Business / System / Application / Technology /
Data.
Implements Indicates that a Rule Impl Component implements a rule.
Violates Indicates that the rule is violated by the connecting model element.
(c) Sparx Systems 2023 Page 41 of 53 Created with Enterprise ArchitectThe Zachman Framework 10 November, 2023
Tagged Values for Zachman Framework
The Zachman Framework makes extensive use of Tagged Values to assign custom properties to the various Zachman
Framework elements.  When creating or viewing a Zachman Framework model, it is recommended that you keep the
Properties window docked and visible at all times, with the 'ZF' section expanded.
Access
Ribbon Start > All Windows > Properties > General > Tagged Values
Explore > Portals > Windows > Properties > Tagged Values
Keyboard Shortcuts Ctrl+2
Synchronize Tagged Values
From time to time you might need to add missing Tagged Values to all elements in the model that require them, such as:
Whenever you create a new element by any means other than directly dropping the element from the Zachman ·
Framework Toolbox pages
Before using a new version of the Technology, to update the Tagged Values of elements in existing models to the ·
latest version of the Zachman Framework profile
You can do this using the 'Synchronize Stereotype' option on the icons in the Zachman Framework pages of the Diagram
Toolbox.
(c) Sparx Systems 2023 Page 42 of 53 Created with Enterprise ArchitectThe Zachman Framework 10 November, 2023
Data Map Analysis
A valid Data Map diagram is basically an Entity Relationship diagram constructed using Principal Entity, Structure
Entity and Intersecting Entity elements. The relationships between them are defined by the business rules.
Principal Entities are identified from the Business Entities in scope ·
Intersecting Entities are used to break a many-to-many association between Principal Entities, which form potential ·
business processes
Structure Entities represent the existence of a potential knowledge base ·
This is an example of a valid Data Map diagram:
Cluster Reports and Process Maps are deliverables of a valid Data Map diagram analysis.
Perform a Data Map diagram analysis
With the Data Map diagram to be analyzed open and active, either:
Select the 'Specialize > Add-Ins > Zachman Framework > Do Data-Map Analysis' ribbon option, or ·
Right-click on the Data Map diagram in the Browser window, and select the 'Specialize | Zachman Framework | Do ·
Data-Map Analysis' context menu option
The 'Data Map Analysis' dialog displays.
(c) Sparx Systems 2023 Page 43 of 53 Created with Enterprise ArchitectThe Zachman Framework 10 November, 2023
Click on the checkbox against each deliverable required. If you have selected 'Generate Cluster Report', also enter the
file pathname under which to save the report.
Click on the Generate button.
(c) Sparx Systems 2023 Page 44 of 53 Created with Enterprise ArchitectThe Zachman Framework 10 November, 2023
Cluster Report
A cluster is a logically related group of processes arranged in a sequence, this being the plan of the order of the execution
of processes.
This Cluster Report was generated for the sample Data Map diagram, in .rtf format.
The report shows how each cluster is a logical group of processes or tasks forming a major business process.
The number preceding each entity name is the phase number for the entity. Phase 1 against an entity means that the entity
forms a potential resource/element that must be procured/framed before proceeding with the business process.
Entities with phase numbers greater than 1 are potential processes, with their sequence of execution set after
procuring/framing the phase 1 entities in the cluster.
After successful completion of Data Map analysis, the phase property of each entity in the Data Map diagram is set
accordingly.
Acknowledgement
(c) Sparx Systems 2023 Page 45 of 53 Created with Enterprise ArchitectThe Zachman Framework 10 November, 2023
The algorithm for Cluster Report generation is derived from the book Enterprise Architecture for Integration: Rapid
Delivery Methods and Technologies (Clive Finkelstein; April 2006).
(c) Sparx Systems 2023 Page 46 of 53 Created with Enterprise ArchitectThe Zachman Framework 10 November, 2023
Process Map
A Process Map is the visual model of the Cluster Report; however, the Phase 1 entities in the Cluster Report are not
shown. The Process Map groups the identified Business Processes into the stages of the project, arranged as a guide for
the project.
This is the Process Map generated for the sample Data Map diagram.
(c) Sparx Systems 2023 Page 47 of 53 Created with Enterprise ArchitectThe Zachman Framework 10 November, 2023
Business Scorecard Report Template
To aid your strategic management methods, the Zachman Framework provides a report template for creating Business
Scorecards.
Generate a Business Scorecard
Step Action
1 In the Browser window, click on the Package containing your Business Perspectives and Strategies (an
Owner | Business Plan | Strategic Plan Package).
The Business Perspectives must own the respective strategies.
2 Either:
Press F8, or ·
Select the 'Publish > Model Reports > Report Builder > Generate Documentation' menu option ·
The 'Generate Documentation' dialog displays.
3 In the 'Use Template' field, click on the drop-down arrow and select 'Balanced Score Card'.
4 Click on the Generate button.
(c) Sparx Systems 2023 Page 48 of 53 Created with Enterprise ArchitectThe Zachman Framework 10 November, 2023
Model Validation
The Zachman Framework registers with Enterprise Architect to receive model validation requests from users.
Configure Model Validation
To configure Enterprise Architect to perform Zachman Framework model validation, select:
'Design > Package > Manage > Validate > Configure Validation Rules' ·
The 'Model Validation Configuration' dialog displays.
To perform validation on Zachman Framework models only, click on the Select None button and then click on the
checkbox for 'Zachman Framework (ZF) Rules'. Click on the OK button.
Validate Zachman Framework Model
You can validate, against the Zachman Framework rules:
An element and any connectors attached to it ·
A diagram and all its elements, or ·
A Package and all its diagrams and elements ·
To do this, click on the element, diagram or Package and then select:
'Design > Package > Manage > Validate > Validate Current Package' ·
The 'Model Validation status' dialog displays, showing the progress of the validation.
(c) Sparx Systems 2023 Page 49 of 53 Created with Enterprise ArchitectThe Zachman Framework 10 November, 2023
Validation Messages for Elements
These error messages can be output by the validation of a Zachman Framework element.
Messages
Element Diagram and Message
Event Node Event Schedule
Message: Event Nodes must be used only with Business Cycles
Meaning: An Event Node has been used with elements other than Business Cycle.
Event Node Event Schedule
Message: Message triggered Event Node must have a message defined
Meaning: An Event Node with the 'Trigger' Tagged Value set to 'Message' does not
have the 'MessageDetail' Tagged Value set.
Event Node Event Schedule
Message: Rule triggered Event Node must have Rule defined
Meaning: An Event Node with the 'Trigger' Tagged Value set to 'Rule' does not
have the 'Rule' Tagged Value set.
Event Node Event Schedule
Message: Error triggered Event Node must have the Error defined
Meaning: An Event Node with the 'Trigger' Tagged Value set to 'ErrorDetail' does
not have the 'Error' Tagged Value set.
Event Node Event Schedule
Message: Multiple triggered Event Node must have a defined list of Triggers
Meaning: An Event Node with the 'Trigger' Tagged Value set to 'Multiple' does not
have the 'Trigger' Tagged Value set.
Business Cycle Event Schedule
Message: Business Cycles must have Event Nodes defined
Meaning: A Business Cycle element does not have any Event Nodes defined.
Goal Business Motivation/ Strategy Map
Message: Goal not realized
Meaning: A Goal has no relationship defined with other model artifacts.
Strategy Business Motivation/ Strategy Map
Message: Strategy not realized
Meaning: A Strategy has no relationship defined with other model artifacts.
(c) Sparx Systems 2023 Page 50 of 53 Created with Enterprise ArchitectThe Zachman Framework 10 November, 2023
Validation Messages for Connectors
These error messages can be output by the validation of a Zachman Framework connector.
Messages
Connector Diagram and Message
Association Data Map
Message: DataMap Association must have a valid source element
Meaning: An Association has a source element other than Principal Entity,
Structure Entity or Intersecting Entity.
Association Data Map
Message: DataMap Association must have a valid target element
Meaning: An Association has a target element other than Principal Entity, Structure
Entity or Intersecting Entity.
Association Data Map
Message: Possibility of an Intersecting entity < name> which might represent a
Potential Business Process exists – This is a warning message.
Meaning: An Association has a many-to-many relationship, informing that the
relationship could be normalized.
Strategy Link Strategy Map
Message: Strategy Map Association must have a valid source element
Meaning: A Strategy Link has a source element other than Strategy and Goal.
Strategy Link Strategy Map
Message: StrategyMap Association must have a valid target element
Meaning: A Strategy Link has a target element other than Strategy and Goal.
(c) Sparx Systems 2023 Page 51 of 53 Created with Enterprise ArchitectThe Zachman Framework 10 November, 2023
Validation Messages for Diagrams
These error message can be output by the validation of a Zachman Framework diagram.
Messages
Diagram Message
Data Map Entities must have relations in DataMap
Meaning: In the Data Map diagram there are entities with no relationships defined.
(c) Sparx Systems 2023 Page 52 of 53 Created with Enterprise ArchitectThe Zachman Framework 10 November, 2023
(c) Sparx Systems 2023 Page 53 of 53 Created with Enterprise Architect